Here is a list of all of the configuration options for FreeWPC.

The preferred way to configure the code
to build a particular image is to create a file named @file{.config} in the
top-level directory, and specify Makefile variables there.  Some
values are required, others are optional.

@file{.config} is written in normal Makefile syntax, so you can declare
these values in any way that GNU make understands.  In the most
basic form,

@example
	VAR=value
@end example

will set a variable to some value.  Or,

@example
	VAR += value
@end example

will append to an existing value.

Make variables are translated by the build system into:

@itemize @bullet
@item other Make variables,
@item flags to the C compiler, or
@item flags to the linker, or
@item flags to other programs used during the build process.
@end itemize

@table @code

@item MACHINE

Identifies the machine you want to build.  This is the
same name as the subdirectory named under 'machine' that
.has all of the machine-specific configuration.

This MUST be set, otherwise the build has no idea what
you want to do.

@item NATIVE

If set (to any value), says to compile the code to run
on the build machine, rather than the target hardware.
This is currently only supported for WPC machines.
It replaces certain platform-specific calls with
built-in emulation.  Native builds do not require an
emulator to run.

The output of a native build will be an executable
named 'freewpc', instead of a ROM image.

@item FREEWPC_DEBUGGER

If set to 'y', enables the builtin debugger support.
This requires a patched PinMAME and the 'wpcdebug'
utility.  It does not work on real hardware, although
it does not hurt to have it compiled in.

Code can use the 'dbprintf' function to print
debug messages.

@item TARGET_ROMPATH

Optionally sets the name of the directory in which
PinMAME ROM files are kept.  When it is set, each
time a ROM is compiled, and if the machine supports it,
the ROM is copied into the PinMAME directory, overwriting
an existing game ROM.  This makes it easy to test.

The original game ROM is always saved, and can be restored
by running 'make uninstall' at any time.

The machine's Makefile will say which version gets
overwritten (e.g., tz_92 for Twilight Zone) and how
sound ROM files are treated.

@item SYSTEM_MAJOR
@item SYSTEM_MINOR

Sets the major/minor version numbers to be used.
If not set, the build will be labeled version 0.0.

@item GCC_VERSION

@item EXTRA_CFLAGS

Used to pass in any additional flags to the C compiler.
This is the most generic way of controlling the build process for
C files.

In some cases, there are Make variables that will have the
same effect, or at least appear to have the same effect, as
defining a value in EXTRA_CFLAGS.  Use the Make variable when
possible.  In many cases, setting one Make variable has
many effects, allowing all tools and the entire build system
to be aware of something.  Setting EXTRA_CFLAGS only makes
something known to the C compiler.

These defines are not visible to assembly language files.
EXTRA_ASFLAGS can be used to similar effect.

The flags that you might want to add here are listed below.
Note that these will never be automatically set by the build system,
so this is the only way to add them:

@table @code

@item	CONFIG_DEBUG_STACK

@item	CONFIG_DEBUG_TASKCOUNT

@item	CONFIG_INSPECTOR

Enables the inspector module, which allows memory to be dumped
to the DMD via special button commands.  This works even when
there is no other debug support.

@item	CONFIG_PARALLEL_DEBUG

When FREEWPC_DEBUGGER is set, this value changes debug
output to be written to the parallel port, rather than to the
debug console.  This allows for debugging when using an
unpatched PinMAME.

@item	DEBUG_SWITCH_NUMBER

Causes the switch number to be printed to the debugger every time
a switch closure occurs.

@item	DEBUGGER

Enables builtin debug messages throughout the code.  These are only
printed in native mode, or under PinMAME when using the debugger add-on.

@item	FREE_ONLY

Enables Free Play all the time.

@item	IDLE_PROFILE

Enables idle-time profiling, to see how much CPU is free.

@item	MALLOC_TEST

@item	NOSTATIC

@item	PARANOID

Enables lots of runtime checks that aren't likely to ever fail.

@item	STANDALONE

@item	STOP_ON_ERROR

When defined, causes the system to halt on a fatal
error.  Normally, the system is restarted.  This can make
debugging easier sometimes.

@item	WMSLY_CORRECT

@end table

@end table

In the machine description (.md file) or in the machine-specific Makefile,
you can set the following defines:

In the C code, you can use the following defines that are set for you
correctly by the build system.  Note that not all such defines are given here;
some are used internally at the 'lowest layers' and should never need to
be changed or known to application developers.


@table @code

@item	__cplusplus

Defined by any C++ compiler.

@item	__m6809__

Defined only by the 6809 C compiler.  Use this when writing
6809 CPU only code.

@item	__mint16__

Defined by the 6809 C compiler when the -mint16 option is in
effect.

@item	CONFIG_BIG_ENDIAN
@item	CONFIG_LITTLE_ENDIAN

Says that the CPU is big-endian or little-endian.  (Automatically set.)

@item	CONFIG_NATIVE

Says that a native build is being performed.  Here, the hardware
platform is being emulated by compiling to run on the same machine,
with I/O calls being emulated by special code.

Currently, the only platform that can be emulated is WPC.

@item	CONFIG_PLATFORM_<platform>

Use to distinguish between the different platforms.
Possible values are 'wpc', 'whitestar', and 'wpcsound'.

@item	CONFIG_UI

Build a user-interface (UI) into the native build.
(This is the default.  Previously it was possible to build a native
mode program that did not use ncurses.)

@item	GCC4

Says that version 4.0 or higher of the GCC 6809 toolchain is being
used.  This is used to work around some limitations of the 3.x toolchain.

@item	HAVE_LOCAL_SECTION
@item	HAVE_NVRAM
@item	HAVE_NVRAM_SECTION

@item	HAVE_PAGING

Says that paging hardware is present.

@end table

Each machine specifies many of its properties using a machine configuration
file, given in 'md syntax'.  The 'genmachine' script converts this
configuration to C code.

Here is a list of the C defines that genmachine can currently generate.

@table @code

@item	MACHINE_ADD_COIN_SOUND

The sound call to make when a coin is inserted, that does not
award a full credit.

@item	MACHINE_ADD_CREDIT_SOUND

The sound call to make when a coin is inserted and a credit is added.

@item	MACHINE_AMODE_EFFECTS
@item	MACHINE_AMODE_FLIPPER_SOUND_CODE
@item	MACHINE_BALL_IN_PLAY_MUSIC

@item	MACHINE_BALL_SERVE_SOLENOID

The ID of the solenoid that serves a ball from the trough.

@item	MACHINE_BUYIN_LAMP

Says which lamp is attached to the extra ball buyin button.

@item	MACHINE_BUYIN_SWITCH

The ID of the extra-ball buyin switch, if any.

@item	MACHINE_CUSTOM_AMODE

@item	MACHINE_DCS

Says the machine uses the DCS sound board.

@item	MACHINE_DEBUGGER_HOOK

@item	MACHINE_END_GAME_MUSIC

The music clip to be played at end of game.

@item	MACHINE_EXTRA_BALL_LAMP

Says which lamp is lit when extra balls have been collected.

@item	MACHINE_FEATURE_ADJUSTMENTS

A list of the feature adjustments

@item	MACHINE_FEATURE_AUDITS
A list of the feature audits

@item	MACHINE_FLIPTRONIC

Says the machine uses the Fliptronic (I or II) flipper board.

@item	MACHINE_HAS_NOVICE_MODE

Defined when the novice mode feature should be installed.

@item	MACHINE_HAS_UPPER_LEFT_FLIPPER

Defined when a machine has an upper left flipper.

@item	MACHINE_HAS_UPPER_RIGHT_FLIPPER

Defined when a machine has an upper right flipper.

@item	MACHINE_KNOCKER_SOLENOID

The ID for the knocker coil.

@item	MACHINE_KNOCKER_SOUND

A sound code to invoke instead of firing the knocker coil.

@item	MACHINE_LAMP_EFFECTS

@item	MACHINE_LAUNCH_SOLENOID

The ID of the autoplunger coil, if any.

@item	MACHINE_LAUNCH_SWITCH

The ID of the autoplunger cabinet button, if any.

@item	MACHINE_MAX_BALLS

The maximum number of balls that can be installed.
This is equal to or less than the trough size.

@item	MACHINE_OUTHOLE_SWITCH

The ID for the outhole switch, if there is one.

@item	MACHINE_SHOOTER_SWITCH

The ID for the shooter switch.

@item	MACHINE_SLAM_TILT_SWITCH

The ID for the slam tilt switch.

@item	MACHINE_SOL_EXTBOARD1

Defined when the machine uses the optional 8-driver board.

@item	MACHINE_SOL_NOSEARCHP

A macro which takes one argument, a solenoid number, and returns true
if that solenoid should not be pulsed in ball search.

@item	MACHINE_START_BALL_MUSIC

The music code to invoke when a ball is started.

@item	MACHINE_START_GAME_SOUND

The sound code to call when a new game is started.

@item	MACHINE_START_LAMP

Says which lamp is attached to the start button.

@item	MACHINE_START_SWITCH

The ID for the start button switch.

@item	MACHINE_TEST_MENU_ITEMS

@item	MACHINE_TEST_ONLY

@item	MACHINE_TILT_SWITCH

The ID for the plumb tilt switch.

@item	MACHINE_TZ

@item	MACHINE_VOLUME_CHANGE_MUSIC

@end table

Other defines not categorized yet:

@table @code

@item CONFIG_COIN_DOOR_WARNING
@item CONFIG_PAGED_RAM
@item CONFIG_TEST_DURING_GAME
@item CONFIG_TIMED_GAME
@item CONFIG_TIMED_GAME_MAX
@item CONFIG_TIMED_GAME_OVER_DEFF
@item CONFIG_TIMED_GAME_OVER_LEFF
@item CONFIG_TIMED_GAME_OVER_SOUND
@item CURSES
@item DEBUG_FLIPCODE
@item DEFF_DEBUG
@item FUTURE
@item INCLUDE_AUTOPLUNGER
@item PTHDEBUG
@item PTHDEBUG2
@item TASKCOUNT
@item TASK_CHAINING
@item TRIAC_DEBUG
@item WPC_ORKIN_DEBUG

@end table

