@table @code

@item add_credits
One or more full credits have just been added, via coins or the service
switch.

@item add_partial_credits
One or more partial credits have just been added.

@item add_player
A new player has been added to the game in progress.  This event is
thrown for all players, including the first one.  For the first player,
it is thrown after the start_game event.  When called, all player-local
variables are in scope.

@item amode_page
Thrown by the attract mode pager to allow machines to add their own
pages into the attract mode display sequence.

@item amode_start
Attract mode has just started.

@item amode_stop
Attract mode has just stopped.

@item any_device_enter
A ball has entered any of the ball devices.

@item any_kick_attempt
An attempt is about to be made to kick from one of the ball devices.

@item any_pf_switch
A playfield switch closure occurred.

@item ball_count_change
The number of balls in play has changed.

@item boolean ball_drain
A ball has entered the trough; should it be treated as a drain?
This event should be received by ballsaver logic.  It should return
FALSE if this is not to be considered a drain, in which case the
handler should also put a ball back into play somehow.  Otherwise, it
should return TRUE.

The standard ballsaver module takes care of this, but you can hook this if
you write an "unlimited ball" mode, like Lost in the Zone.

@item ball_search
A ball search attempt is in progress.  This event is thrown each time
all of the solenoids are pulsed to try to find the ball.  It should be
received by modules which need to do some special processing, such as
raising/lowering a motor bank -- anything more complicated than just
firing a solenoid.

@item bonus
End of ball bonus has started.

@item dev_@var{foo}_enter
The device "foo" was just entered (its count went up by 1).

@item dev_@var{foo}_kick_attempt
The system is about to try to kick a ball from device "foo".
It cannot be stopped at this point; see the kick_request
event if you want to delay for some reason.

@item dev_@var{foo}_kick_failure
A kick from device "foo" failed (its count did not change).

@item dev_@var{foo}_kick_request
The system wants to try to kick a ball from device "foo".
If you return FALSE from this event, the attempt will be delayed
for a while.

@item dev_@var{foo}_kick_success
A kick from device "foo" succeeded (its count went down by 1).
If more than 1 ball is released at the same time, then more than one
of these will be thrown.

@item dev_@var{foo}_surprise_release
The count of a device went down by 1 when a release was not initiated
by software; the ball fell out of the device by other means.

@item device_update
Called periodically to update any mechanical devices whose state
changes frequently depending on a variety of factors.  Unlike other
periodic update functions, this will not be called during a ball search.

@item diagnostic_check
Called after init_complete to perform further diagnostic checks.  Note
that unlike init_ok, a diagnostic_check failure does not cause factory
reset and reboot, but only flags a problem.  These errors are reported
in test report.  The diagnostic check can wait if necessary for powerup
tests to complete, but take care that it does not wait forever.

@item display_update
The running display effect needs to be updated.  This is called whenever
a display effect exits; it may also be called periodically.  Modules which
want to display a long-running effect (e.g. for a running mode) should
receive this event, see if the condition to start the effect is valid
(i.e. the mode is running), and call deff_start_bg() to request a
particular background effect be started.  That call itself doesn't guarantee
that the effect will run; if multiple requests are made, only the one with the
highest priority will run.

@item empty_balls_test
The empty balls test has been initiated.  The system will take care of
emptying ordinary ball devices; this event is for modules which store
balls in some other way (e.g. virtual devices like TZ's gumball machine).

@item boolean empty_trough_kick
This is thrown prior to serving a new ball from the trough after a ball
lock.  It allows machines to override this behavior and serve the ball
from somewhere else if desired.  When this is wanted, the handler should
return FALSE.  The system automatically handles the case where the trough
is empty and the ball must be served from somewhere else anyway.

@item end_ball
End-of-ball has been asserted.  This is thrown just before end of ball
bonus starts.

@item end_game
End-of-game has been asserted (for all players).  This is thrown after
all of the end game effects, like high score entry and match.

@item end_player
End-player has been asserted.  This is called after end_ball, and
before end_game.

@item extra_ball_award
An extra ball has just been awarded.

@item factory_reset
A factory reset has been initiated.  This event should be received by
any module with a __permanent__ variable, so that it can be reinitialized.
Audits and adjustments are handled automatically.

@item flipper_abort
Both flipper buttons were pressed simultaneously.

@item flipper_code_entered
TBD.

@item idle
This event will be thrown exactly once every 16ms, after all running
tasks have been scanned and given a chance to run.  If tasks take
a long while, it is possible that this event will run less frequently.
However, this event cannot be starved out indefinitely.  The idle event
is not thrown during early system initialization.  As this event happens
frequently, it is usually not the right event for non-system modules to receive.

@item idle_every_100ms
Like idle, but only called once per 100 milliseconds.  This is the
preferred event for modules to use for periodic processing.

@item idle_every_second
Like idle, but only called once per second.  This can be used instead
of the 100ms event for less frequent processing.

@item idle_every_ten_seconds
Like idle, but only called once per 10 seconds.  This can be used
for extremely infrequent processing.

@item init
Called during phase 1 of system initialization.  An init receiver
cannot assume anything about any other modules than itself.  This is
normally used to initialize variables, but not to begin device I/O.

@item init_complete
Called during phase 2 of system initialization.  This is intended for
modules which require interaction with each other.  This is usually the
right event for a complex device driver to perform I/O-based initialization,
(e.g. calibration of a motor).

@item init_ok @asis{(boolean)}
Called after init to determine if initialization failed for any module.
Handlers should return FALSE on failure, TRUE on success.  If any
handler returns FALSE, an automatic factory reset will occur, and the
init_complete event will not be generated.

@item lamp_update
Called periodically to update the lamp matrix.  This should be received
to update a lamp whose state depends on a variety of conditions which
may be constantly changing (e.g. a generic "mode arrow" which could
be off, flash, or solid and is used by multiple modes.)  In these cases,
the state of the lamp is dependent on several variables, and the
lamp_update routine recalculates the state of the lamp.

@item match_awarded
A match was just awarded to one or more players.

@item minute_elapsed
One minute of real time has elapsed, as detected by the real-time clock.

@item missing_ball_found
Don't use this... it will probably be deleted.

@item music_refresh
Called periodically to update the running background music.

@item replay
A replay was just awarded.

@item score_deff_start
The default score screen display effect just started.

@item score_overlay
Thrown just after the default score screen is drawn, but before it is
displayed.  It allows machines to add an auxiliary effect into the score
screen, e.g. the starfield on Twilight Zone or the swimming fish on
Fish Tales.

@item serve_ball
A new ball was just served to the shooter lane.  This event is thrown
during start_ball, and after locking a ball, but it is not thrown during
a ball save.  It is intended to be used for relighting a skill shot, or
for enabling a ball saver.  This event also signals that valid_playfield
has been reset; i.e. draining this ball without scoring will cause it
to be re-served.

@item shoot_again
Called during start_ball if an extra ball is being played.

@item single_ball_play
The game was in multiball, but is now back into 1-ball play.  This should
be handled by multiball modes to shutdown.

@item slam_tilt
The machine has been slam-tilted.

@item special_award
A special was just awarded.

@item start_ball
Start-of-ball has been asserted.

@item start_game
A new game has been started.

@item start_player
Called during the first ball of each player.  For player 1, it is called
after start_game.  This should be received by any module with a __local__
variable declaration, which is per-player, to initialize it correctly.

@item start_without_credits
The start button has been pressed in attract mode without credits.

@item status_report
Thrown after all of the default status report pages have been displayed,
to allow machines to define their own pages.

@item stop_game
The game in progress has been cancelled, due to game restart or exiting
to test mode.

@item sw_@var{foo}
The switch @var{foo} has transitioned.  Normally switch events are only
generated on a transition from inactive to active.  Switches marked
"edge" in the machine configuration will also generate events when
going back to inactive: for those switches, handlers must use
switch_poll_logical() to determine the current state of the switch to
do the right thing.

@item test_start
Test mode has been started.

@item tilt
The player has just tilted his ball.

@item tilt_warning
The player has just received a tilt warning.

@item timed_drain_penalty
In a timed game, the player has drained the ball.  This should be
received by any modes that want to penalize the player for draining,
by changing game features or further decreasing the game timer.

@item timed_game_tick
In a timed game, the game timer has decreased by 1 second.

@item valid_playfield
Called after start_ball when the ball has been put into play; a
ball drain at this point will now signal end_ball.  This is normally
asserted on any scoring switch, and is what enables a zero-point ball
to be re-served.  Certain switches like jets and slingshots, which can
fire if misaligned, can be marked "noplay" to disable this.  The machine
may use other methods to assure that it is eventually asserted, based on
number of switch closures or timing.

@end table
