
This appendix provides an overview of the WPC hardware, in terms of its
capabilities and how software is able to control everything in the machine.

@section Overview

WPC pinball machines contain a number of circuit boards, some that are
intelligent with microprocessors, and others that are passive.  One of these,
the CPU board, is the master and houses the main microprocessor, a Motorola
6809 running at 2MHz.  All
other boards are connected to this one via ribbon cables.  The functionality
is spread across multiple boards to make maintenance easier and to isolate
faults.  These data cables carry 5V, generally active low signals.  Inputs
read as high (inactive) when the cables are disconnected.

From 1990-1999, six different generations of machines were produced, which
differed only slightly.  In order of appearance:

@itemize @bullet
@item WPC Alphanumeric

The initial generation, which used 2 16-character alphanumeric displays,
Each character is comprised of 14 line segments, a comma, and a period.

In addition to the CPU board, there is a power driver board which handles
all of the high voltage I/O, and an alphanumeric controller board, which
translates CPU commands into the proper signals that the displays need.
There is also a separate sound board.

@item WPC DMD

In the second generation, the alphanumerics are replaced by a
dot matrix controller/display (DMD), which has 128x32 pixels.
The display expects a serial bitstream and must be continously refreshed.
The controller board stores up to 16 frames in its own RAM and handles
the refresh.  It connects to the main CPU board which writes the data.
The display refreshes at 122Mhz.

@item WPC Fliptronic

Here, the flipper switches and drive transistors are moved from the regular
switch matrix and power driver board onto a separate board, called the
Fliptronic Board.  There are Fliptronic I and Fliptronic II boards but
they appear the same to software.

This frees up several of the switch matrix entries previously used for
flipper buttons for other purposes.  The flipper-related circuitry on
the power driver board goes unused.

@item WPC DCS

With the DCS generation, the sound board is radically improved,
replacing the synthesizer chip and low-quality analog circuits with a DSP
supporting high fidelity, stereo, multi-channel sound.

@item WPC Security

A security PIC chip is added between the ASIC and the switch matrix
inputs.  The CPU no longer reads the switch data directly; it sends
commands to the PIC which then reads the data.  The PIC requires some
special cryptic codes to be sent otherwise it will not return valid
switch data, making the game unplayable.

@item WPC-95

The functions of the circuit boards are combined into fewer boards,
using FPGAs to replace many of the discrete TTL components.  Functionally
it is not much different, although the CPU addresses for many of the
functions changed.  The WPC ASIC remained the same, but its outputs are
connected to the other circuit boards in slightly different ways.

@end itemize

@section CPU Board

The CPU board contains the main processor: a Motorola 68B09E, running at 2Mhz.
It is an 8-bit/16-bit CPU with a 64KB address space.  Bank switching is
required to address more than 64KB.  On reset, location 0xFFFE is
read to determine the address of the first instruction.

8KB of RAM is located at physical address 0x0000.  When power is turned off,
three AA batteries on the CPU board maintain the state of the RAM.

The game ROM size varies from 128KB to 1MB, depending on the game.
The hardware supports a maximum of 1MB; this upper limit was used in all of
the later models to accommodate more and more graphics.  The uppermost 32KB is
permanently mapped into the 64KB address space at address 0x8000 and contains
the core operating system functions.  The remaining parts of the ROM
must be bank switched in, 16KB at a time; only one 16KB bank at a time
is visible at address 0x4000.

The WPC ASIC is the heart of the system and is essentially a
giant address decoder.  It combines a lot of the functionality that
was performed by PIAs and TTL logic in earlier solid state games.
All read/write requests from the CPU are first seen by the ASIC, which can
then either respond to it directly if it is an
internal function, or forward the request to another device.  RAM and ROM
requests cause those devices enables to be asserted.  For I/O, it may be
more complicated and cause I/O to other circuit boards.

@subsection Blanking

The system blanking circuit protects the circuit boards during
system initialization.  The ASIC generates the BLANKING signal which is
carried to all of the other boards.  When asserted, BLANKING means
to disable all output circuits.

Blanking is initially asserted by the ASIC at powerup, so that no
lamps or solenoids can be turned on, regardless of the states of the
outputs from the CPU board.  Once the CPU has initialized, it writes to
the ASIC to disable blanking; then the other register outputs take effect.

@subsection Diagnostics LED

LED 3 is controlled by writing to bit 7 of the WPC_LEDS
register; this register can also be read to get the current LED state.
The OS toggles this bit periodically to indicate that the system is alive.
It is also used during early fatal errors as a primitive way of
providing an error message.

@subsection Watchdog

The ASIC has a builtin watchdog timer which will reset the CPU board if
software does not restart it periodically.  The expiration seems to be
on the order of 1 or 2ms.

FreeWPC restarts the watchdog on every periodic interrupt, every 1ms.
During initialization, when interrupts are disabled, it also restarts it
occasionally.

@subsection Bit Shifter

The ASIC has a bit shifter which offloads the CPU from having to
calculate shifts using multiple CPU instructions.  The 6809 does not
have a native shift instruction for more than 1 bit at a time.

The bit shifter is used to optimize bit-level operations (set,
clear, test, and toggle).  This is particularly useful on WPC because
RAM is scarce; many variables are stored as bits to save space.

@subsection Memory Protection

As an address decoder, the WPC ASIC is capable of restricting access
to any part of the address space.  The memory protection circuit
lets you lock a portion of the system RAM as read-only, so that writes
to those addresses are effectively no-ops.

The feature can be enabled/disabled, and the size of the protected
region can also be specified.  The region must reside in the uppermost
part of RAM and must be a power of 2 in size.

FreeWPC uses memory protection to guard adjustments, audits, and some
other vital data.

@subsection Time of Day Clock

The time-of-day device maintains the current calendar time.  It has
two read/write registers, which stores hours and minutes.  The clock
continues to count even when power is turned off.

Software maintains the calendar time in nonvolatile memory.

@subsection High Resolution Timer

The high resolution timer is not currently used by FreeWPC.
It allows for sub-millisecond accuracy, and was only used in
alphanumeric games to do display dimming.

@subsection Bank Switching

The bank switch register allows you to select which portion of the
ROM is mapped to the banked region of the physical address space,
at 0x4000.  Only the lower 6-bits of the register are used, allowing
for up to 64 pages.  These bits become the uppermost address lines
sent to the ROM device.

@subsection The Switch Matrix

All of the switch inputs terminate directly on the CPU board.
This includes up to 64 playfield switches, arranged in an 8x8 matrix;
8 direct inputs used for service buttons and coin switches; and
several jumpers/DIP switches used for configuring some factory defaults.

@subsection External I/O

All of the other I/O is located on other boards, which are connected
to the CPU board via ribbon cables.  Generally on these cables, one side
of the pins are connected to ground, while the others contain actual
inputs/outputs.  All logic values measure 0V for a '0', and +5V for a '1'.
Inputs have pullup resistors so that reading the signal while the cable
is not connected will return '1'.
All generations of WPC use the same 17x2 pin connector to
the power driver board, which controls lamps and general solenoids.
Display, sound, and flipper interfaces differ somewhat between generations.

Special I/O boards exist to drive other miscellaneous devices like
ticket dispensers or a printer.  These were addons that are not typically
installed in all machines.

@subsection Interrupts

The ASIC generates the reset, IRQ, and FIRQ signals which are sent to the CPU.

The 6809 instructions to generate @emph{soft interrupts} --- swi, swi2,
and swi3, are not used.  The handlers for those vectors all throw fatal
errors.

@subsubsection Reset

The ASIC drives the CPU reset signal.  This signal is active low; normally
the reset line is high.  The ASIC will pull reset low when the watchdog
timer expires.

@subsubsection IRQ

IRQ is generated 976 times per second, about once every 1.02ms.  An
oscillator on the CPU board generates the frequency.
The periodic interrupt
can be disabled/enabled by writing to the ASIC's WPC_ZEROCROSS_IRQ_CLEAR
register.  Separately, IRQ can be masked/unmasked by writing to the
6809's condition-code (CC) register.

@subsubsection FIRQ

FIRQ can be generated in two ways: from the dot matrix controller after a
certain scanline is redrawn, or from the high-performance timer.  When
an FIRQ is received, the CPU has to determine which of these occurred
to determine how to process it.

The DMD controller can interrupt via FIRQ when a particular scanline of
the display has just been sent to the display.  This can be used to
tell the CPU when to display a new frame.

The high precision timer can interrupt when its value reaches zero.

Either of these can be enabled/disabled individually, in addition to
masking the interrupt at the processor.

@subsubsection NMI

The CPU's NMI input is not used and is connected to Vcc.

@section Power Driver Board

The power driver board contains all of the high power circuitry.
It has no intelligent parts and is controlled completely by the CPU board
over a short ribbon cable.  It houses the drive transistors which switch
current to the high power devices, along with fuses and other power-related
circuitry.

@subsection Lamp Circuits

WPC supports up to 64 individually controllable lamps.  The lamps are
arranged in an 8x8 matrix.  At any given instant, only 8 of the lamps
can receive power.  A column strobe is written to determine which set
of 8 lamps is being addressed.  A row output is written to specify
the on/off states of that set of lamps.  Software must repeatedly
strobe each of the lamp columns in order to update all 64 lamps.

The filaments in incandescent lamps operate at around 6V.  The lamp
circuitry switches a much higher 18V, but strobing only enables that
voltage for 1/8 of the time, and filaments do not instantly turn off
when power is removed, so no flicker is perceived.  LEDs do not have
this property and this explains the flicker that is often seen when
people replace normal bulbs with LEDs.

@subsection Solenoid Circuits

All versions of the power driver board support 28 controlled outputs for
solenoids, motors, etc.  These are divided into four groups:
8 high power drivers, 8 low power drivers, 8 flashlamp drivers, and
4 general purpose drivers.  Each bank operates at a different voltage,
somewhere between 20V and 50V.

The CPU board enables/disable a driver by writing a command to the
power driver board.  All values are latched on the driver board and thus
retain their states until the CPU changes them.  The latches are not
readable, so software must maintain the last value written in RAM.
A CPU board reset will assert a blanking signal to reset the latches;
this helps in the event of a software crash.

On WPC-95, 4 additional low voltage outputs running at 5V are added
to the general purpose group, which can be used for miscellaneous I/O
like small DC motors.

@subsection General Illumination Circuits

The GI circuitry allows for 5 strings of up to 18 lamps each.
These are separate from the @dfn{controlled lamps} described previously;
individual lamps are not controllable, only entire strings of lamps.
Each string can independently be turned on and off by a triac.
The lamps all run off 6.3V AC.

Starting with WPC-95, two of the GI strings are always on and not
under software control, saving the cost of the triacs, but
eliminating the ability to dim them.

When enabled, the triacs illuminate the lamps until the AC voltage
crosses zero.  They must be constantly re-enabled to keep the lamps on.

@subsection Zero Cross Circuit

The zero-cross circuit tells the CPU when the AC voltage is near zero.

Alternating current (AC) rapidly changes between a positive and
negative voltage many times per second.  In the US, the frequency is
60Hz, which means that the voltage is near zero about once every 8.33ms.
Outside the US, line voltage is 50Hz and so zero crossing occurs every
10ms.

The zero cross data is used to dim the general illumination.

@section Sound Board

Both the WPC and DCS sound boards are connected via a ribbon cable
to the CPU board, which sends it both read and write commands.  The
actual values vary greatly depending on the board type.  These
boards are intelligent and have processors running their own operating
system dedicated to sound tasks.

1-byte or 2-byte commands are written to request particular sounds
to be played.  The sound board stores all of the sound data on
additional EPROMs, and has its own CPU that decodes the data and
writes it to various audio devices.

The sound board can also send data back to the CPU, notably to tell
it when a sound has finished playing, allowing the CPU to synchronize
its actions to the sounds and music.

@section Fliptronic Board

On all but the earliest games, flipper control is located on a
separate board, called the Fliptronic Board.  It has 8 drivers
for up to 4 flippers.  Half of the drivers switch high power 50V,
used when initially turning on a flipper; the other half switch a
lower 'holding' power that is adequate for keeping the flipper
in the raised position for a long period of time.  The board
also supports 8 switches that can be read by the CPU board: 4
for the flipper buttons and 4 end-of-stroke (EOS) switches.
The button switches are wired to the cabinet buttons.  The
EOS switches are mounted on the flipper and used to determine
when the flippers are in the 'up' position, indicating that the
lower power voltage can be used.

On pre-Fliptronic games, the flippers are hardwired to the cabinet
buttons, so flipping occurs without any CPU involvement.  The CPU
can control a relay on the power driver board to cut flipper power,
though.

On WPC-95, the Fliptronic Board was eliminated and its components
moved elsewhere: switch inputs moved to the CPU board, and flipper
outputs moved to the driver board.

@section Auxiliary Driver Board

Some games use an auxiliary driver board which allows up to 8
additional flashlamps/low power devices to be controlled.  These
machines must have the following line in the machine config:

@example
define MACHINE_SOL_EXTBOARD1
@end example

The auxiliary board plugs into the slot formerly used by
the alphanumeric display board; thus, alphanumeric games cannot use
this.  This port was later removed on WPC-95.

@section Dot Matrix Controller Board

The dot matrix display is 128 columns x 32 rows.  The display itself is
very dumb and expects a serial bitstream of pixels to be clocked in.
The controller board has the display RAM and the serialization logic.

The controller fetches 1 byte (8 pixels) every 32 CPU cycles (16 microseconds).
At this rate, it takes 256 microseconds per row and a little more than 8
milliseconds per complete frame.  Thus, the refresh rate is about 122MHz.

The display RAM holds 8KB.  A full DMD bit plane requires 128x32 pixels,
that is, 4096 bits, or 512 bytes.  Thus, there is enough RAM to hold
a total of 16 planes.  At any time, at most two planes can be addressed by the
CPU (changed to six in WPC-95).

The SRAM is designed to allow both the 6809 and the serial decoder
to access it simultaneously, at nonoverlapping phases of the system
clocks.

Bits are encoded within a byte such that the leftmost pixel is in the
least significant bit.  This is backwards from how binary numbers are
normally visualized.

The DMD controller exposes the following registers:

@itemize @bullet

@item Low Mapped Page Register

Says which of the 16 pages is currently accessible at CPU address 0x3800.

@item High Mapped Page Register

Says which of the 16 pages is currently accessible at CPU address 0x3A00.

@item Visible Page Register

The visible page register, WPC_DMD_ACTIVE_PAGE, holds the page number
of the frame that should be clocked to the display.  Writing to this
register does not take effect immediately but instead at the beginning
of the next vertical retrace.

@item Scanline Register

The controller keeps track of which row is currently being refreshed,
and makes this accessible to the CPU by reading the WPC_DMD_SCANLINE register.
Values range from 0 to 31.

The CPU can also write to WPC_DMD_SCANLINE to request an FIRQ interrupt
to be generated when the current scanline reaches a certain value.  This is
used to implement shading: the active page buffer is rapidly changed between
different bit planes at different frequencies to simulate color.  Because
there is latency between the time that FIRQ is generated and the CPU can
respond to it, this writable register can compensate for that delay and
help to ensure that flipping occurs as fast as possible.

@end itemize

@section Memory Map

This section describes the WPC memory map in detail.  In particular,
it gives the function of each of the WPC ASIC registers, along with the
names given to them by FreeWPC.

@table @asis

@item  WPC_RAM_BASE (0x0000)

System RAM (2K)

@item  WPC_DMD_RAM_BASE (0x3800)

Display RAM (1K).  Which 1K portion of the 16K SRAM
appears here is controlled by writing to two display
paging registers, WPC_DMD_HIGH_PAGE and WPC_DMD_LOW_PAGE.
On WPC-95 only, up to 3K can be mapped, starting at 0x3000.

@item  WPC_DEBUG_DATA_PORT (0x3D60)

@item  WPC_DEBUG_CONTROL_PORT (0x3D61)

@item  WPC_SERIAL_CONTROL_PORT (0x3E66)

@item  WPC_SERIAL_DATA_PORT (0x3E67)

@item  WPC_DMD_3200_PAGE (0x3FB8) [WPC-95 only]

3-0: W: The page of display RAM mapped into the 2nd region,
from 0x3200-0x33FF.

@item  WPC_DMD_3000_PAGE (0x3FB9) [WPC-95 only]

3-0: W: The page of display RAM mapped into the 1st region,
from 0x3000-0x31FF.

@item  WPC_DMD_3600_PAGE (0x3FBA) [WPC-95 only]

@item  WPC_DMD_3400_PAGE (0x3FBB) [WPC-95 only]

@item  WPC_DMD_HIGH_PAGE (0x3FBC)

3-0: W: The page of display RAM mapped into the 2nd (6th on WPC95) region,
from 0x3A00-0x3BFF.

@item  WPC_DMD_SCANLINE (0x3FBD)

7-0: W: Request an FIRQ after a particular scanline is drawn
5-0: R: The last scanline that was drawn

@item  WPC_DMD_LOW_PAGE 				0x3FBE

3-0: W: The page of display RAM mapped into the 1st (5th on WPC95) region,
from 0x3800-0x39FF.

@item  WPC_DMD_ACTIVE_PAGE 			0x3FBF
3-0: W: The page of display RAM to be used for refreshing the display.
Writes to this register take effect just prior to drawing scanline 0.

@item  WPC_PARALLEL_STATUS_PORT 	(0x3FC0)

@item  WPC_PARALLEL_DATA_PORT 	(0x3FC1)

@item  WPC_PARALLEL_STROBE_PORT 	(0x3FC2)

@item  WPC_SERIAL_DATA_OUTPUT 	(0x3FC3)

@item  WPC_SERIAL_CONTROL_OUTPUT	(0x3FC4)

@item  WPC_SERIAL_BAUD_SELECT 	(0x3FC5)

@item  WPC_TICKET_DISPENSE 		(0x3FC6)

@item  WPC_FLIPTRONIC_PORT_A 		(0x3FD4)

7: W: Enable upper-left flipper hold
6: W: Enable upper-left flipper power
5: W: Enable upper-right flipper hold
4: W: Enable upper-right flipper power
3: W: Enable lower-left flipper hold
2: W: Enable lower-left flipper power
1: W: Enable lower-right flipper hold
0: W: Enable lower-right flipper power
7: R: Upper-left flipper EOS input
6: R: Upper-left flipper cabinet input
5: R: Upper-right flipper EOS input
4: R: Upper-right flipper cabinet input
3: R: Lower-left flipper EOS input
2: R: Lower-left flipper cabinet input
1: R: Lower-right flipper EOS input
0: R: Lower-right flipper cabinet input

@item  WPC_FLIPTRONIC_PORT_B 		0x3FD5

Not used.

@item  WPCS_DATA 						0x3FDC

7-0: R/W: Send/receive a byte of data to/from the sound board.

@item  WPCS_CONTROL_STATUS 			0x3FDD

7: R: WPC sound board read ready
0: R: DCS sound board read ready

@item  WPC_SOL_GEN_OUTPUT 		   0x3FE0

7-0: W: Enables for solenoids 25-29

@item  WPC_SOL_HIGHPOWER_OUTPUT 	0x3FE1

7-0: W: Enables for solenoids 1-8

@item  WPC_SOL_FLASH1_OUTPUT 		0x3FE2

7-0: W: Enables for solenoids 17-24

@item  WPC_SOL_LOWPOWER_OUTPUT 		0x3FE3

7-0: W: Enables for solenoids 9-16

@item  WPC_LAMP_ROW_OUTPUT 			0x3FE4

7-0: W: Lamp matrix row output

@item  WPC_LAMP_COL_STROBE 			0x3FE5

7-0: W: Lamp matrix column strobe
At most one bit in this register should be set.
If all are clear, then no controlled lamps are
enabled.

@item  WPC_GI_TRIAC 					0x3FE6

7: W: Flipper enable relay
5: W: Coin door enable relay
4-0: W: General illumination enables

@item  WPC_SW_JUMPER_INPUT 			0x3FE7
7-0: R: Jumper/DIP switch inputs

@item  WPC_SW_CABINET_INPUT 			0x3FE8

7: R: Fourth coin switch
6: R: Right coin switch
5: R: Center coin switch
4: R: Left coin switch
3: R: Enter (Begin Test) button
2: R: Up button
1: R: Down button
0: R: Escape (Service Credit) button

@item  WPC_SW_ROW_INPUT 				0x3FE9 *Pre-security

7-0: R: Readings for the currently selected switch column.
Bit 0 corresponds to row 1, bit 1 to row 2, and so on.
A '1' indicates active voltage level.  For a mechanical switch,
this means the switch is closed.  For an optical switch, this
means the switch is open.

@item  WPCS_PIC_READ 					0x3FE9 *WPC-S

@item  WPC_SW_COL_STROBE 				0x3FEA *Pre-security

@item  WPCS_PIC_WRITE 					0x3FEA *WPC-S

7-0: W: Switch column strobe.
For pre-Security games, exactly one bit must be set.
For Security games, writing to this register sends a command
to the PIC chip and does not directly control the strobe line.

@item  WPC_ALPHA_POS 					0x3FEB *Alphanumeric

@item  WPC_EXTBOARD1 					0x3FEB *DMD

On DMD games, this is a general I/O that is used for machine-specific
purposes.

@item  WPC_ALPHA_ROW1 					0x3FEC *Alphanumeric

@item  WPC_EXTBOARD2 					0x3FEC *DMD

On DMD games, this is a general I/O that is used for machine-specific
purposes.

@item  WPC_EXTBOARD3 					0x3FED *DMD

On DMD games, this is a general I/O that is used for machine-specific
purposes.

@item  WPC_ALPHA_ROW2 					0x3FEE *Alphanumeric

@item  WPC95_FLIPPER_COIL_OUTPUT 	0x3FEE *WPC-95

@item  WPC95_FLIPPER_SWITCH_INPUT 	0x3FEF *WPC-95

@item  WPC_LEDS 							0x3FF2

7: R/W : The state of the diagnostic LED.
>0=Off
>1=On

@item  WPC_RAM_BANK 					0x3FF3 *WPC-95

3-0: W: The page of RAM currently mapped into the banked region.

@item  WPC_SHIFTADDR 					0x3FF4
15-0: R/W: The base address for the bit shifter.
Writing to this address initializes the shifter.
Reading from this address after a shift command returns the
shifted address.

@item  WPC_SHIFTBIT 					0x3FF6
7-0: W: Sets the bit position for a shift command.
7-0: R: Returns the output of the last shift command as a bitmask.

@item  WPC_SHIFTBIT2 					0x3FF7
7-0: R/W:

@item  WPC_PERIPHERAL_TIMER_FIRQ_CLEAR 0x3FF8

@item  WPC_ROM_LOCK 					0x3FF9

Not used

@item  WPC_CLK_HOURS_DAYS 			0x3FFA

7-0: R/W : The time-of-day hour counter.

@item  WPC_CLK_MINS 					0x3FFB

7-0: R/W : The time-of-day minute counter.

@item  WPC_ROM_BANK 					0x3FFC

5-0: R/W: The page of ROM currently mapped into the banked region (0x4000-0x7FFF).
Pages 62 and 63 correspond to the uppermost 32KB, and are not normally mapped
because those pages are accessible in the fixed region (0x8000-0xFFFF).
Page numbers are consecutive.  Page 0 corresponds to the lowest address in a
1MB device.  If a smaller ROM is installed, the uppermost bits of this register
are effectively ignored.

@item  WPC_RAM_LOCK 					0x3FFD

@item  WPC_RAM_LOCKSIZE 				0x3FFE

@item  WPC_ZEROCROSS_IRQ_CLEAR 		0x3FFF

7: R: Set to 1 when AC is currently at a zero crossing, or 0 otherwise.
7: W: Writing a 1 here clears the source of the periodic timer interrupt.
4: R/W: Periodic timer interrupt enable
>0=Periodic IRQ disabled
>1=Periodic IRQ enabled
2: W: Writing a 1 here resets the watchdog.

@end table

