
How to Program a New Game

While the rest of this manual serves as a reference to the FreeWPC system,
this chapter takes a different approach and explains systematically how to
go about writing up the rules for a new game from the beginning.  Details
are intentionally skipped here, with pointers back to the relevant sections
of the manual if you want to know more.

@section Overview

Like any good software program, a game should be broken down into logically
separate entities as much as possible.  An object-oriented approach can still
be taken even when coding in C.  I prefer to think of a game as consisting
of a set of mostly independent @dfn{modules}, with each module represented by
a separate C file.

Each module defines a set of functions that are private to it: the implementation.
In C, these are usually coded as "static" functions to prevent accidental use
from other files.  Other functions are public by default.  In FreeWPC, make
sure that you have a prototype for all such functions that includes one of the
ROM bank modifiers (__common__ or __machine__, for example), otherwise they may
not be called correctly.  Always check for warnings in the error file when you
build a ROM; this type of problem is always pointed out there.

For the most part, the game program is event-driven, meaning that functions
are called only when some external event occurs.  The OS throws events for
just about every event that you will care about, but your code can also create
new events too.  There are basically three types of events that you will care
about: switch events (some playfield switch just activated), timer events (some
amount of time has expired), and milestone events (notable points in time like
the start of a game).

Use the callset mechanism to write callback handlers to handle all of the events
you need to monitor.  Nearly every module will require this.  These are the
main entry points to the module.

@section Classes of Modules

Modules can serve different purposes.  I like to classify modules into three
classes: drivers, shot detectors, and rules.  Each of these serves a different
purpose, and keeping them in separate modules is good programming design.

Drivers deal with the physical nature of the specific machine.
They should do nothing with game rules.  Drivers manage the hardware devices
and define an API that lets higher layer game code interact with it.
The hardware aspect can be the most difficult part of programming a pinball game,
as it needs to handle many types of fault conditions.

Shot detection can be viewed as an extension of the switch events.
Sometimes, a single switch activation can be considered a shot, but not always.
Consider on Twilight Zone the detection of left versus right loops; the same
switches are involved, but they are triggered in a different order.  In
Attack From Mars, the right hole awards a "front shot" or "back shot" differently
and used other recent shots to determine which to award.  In the shot modules,
you write logic that defines what makes a valid shot.  You monitor the switches
and timers that contribute to the shot, and then you create new events for the
shots that you define.  By doing this in one module, the rest of the code
can just listen for a "right hole front shot" event.

Shot detection can be overdone if not careful.  It is best to keep it as simple
as possible.  Compensation for bad switches can be done here, too.

The game rules are at the top of the module stack.  Every timed mode, multiball, or
other game feature should generally have its own file.  They use the shot detection
logic to listen for valid shot events and have their own logic for defining how to
award points and what effects to trigger.

Note that drivers and shot detection should be rules-agnostic; thus, once they
are coded correctly, it should be possible to rewrite the game rules without
changing them.

@section Device Drivers

When you start coding a brand new machine, you must write a machine description file.
This defines the physical switches, lamps, and solenoids for that game.  Doing this is
enough to make all of the low-level APIs work.  These @dfn{binary APIs} allow you to
read switches one by one, turn on/off lamps, and pulse solenoids and flashers.

However, you are not allowed to turn on a solenoid permanently.  A generic API to
do so would be dangerous.  For flashers and ball kicking devices, the pulsing APIs,
which ensure that the device is turned off eventually, are enough.  But for some
devices, you need more control.  To do that, you need to write a device driver.

Here are some examples of drivers:

- Diverters which must be held on for a long period of time.
- Solenoids that are tied to switches, like slingshots and jets, which need fast
response time.  Also motor banks which have home switches.
- Devices where there are multiple outputs working together.  For example, the
clock on TZ uses two motor control lines, one to spin forward and another to
spin backward.

Ball kicking devices are automatically handled by the ball device module.
You write definitions in the [containers] section of the md file to define these.
Other device drivers should be written using a template driver.

@section Shot Detection

@section Game Rules

Most modes are OK to overlap and run in parallel; you must explicitly
define how to handle conflicts if this is not wanted.  Rules will listen for shot
events, update state, add to the score, and start display, lamp, and sound effects.

Rules are also the only modules that will need to keep state per-player.  Use the
__local__ modifier to create a per-player variable.  Define flags (not globalflags)
in the machine description to create 1-bit flags.  For trivial rules you can sometimes
keep state directly in the lamp matrix.

Types of rules: static rules, timed modes, multiball modes

Every rule should define the following types of APIs:
- start_game (physical devices only)
- start_player
- start_ball
- available?
- qualified? (running? in grace period?)

- plus other APIs as pertinent to that type of rule
shot->rule mapping

For timed/multiball modes there are predefined APIs...

@section Other Modules

Test modules.  These are extensions to the test mode menus and are generally tied
to a particular device driver, but not all drivers will need a test option.




