= LT5 engine support =

See schematics at 3-25 and 3-24.

AD7524 chip on the Slave Board A-18533 PCB at position U2.  The AD7524's output is used to control the 2 pairs of
solenoids that move the LT5 engine.

The AD7524 chip can be controlled by writing values to WPC_EXTBOARD2 (via the DIS1 line on J204/5) at 0x3FEC.

The 74LS175 chip on the Motor Driver Master Board A-18532 at position U2 (incorrectly marked as a 74LS375 in the
manual) on page 3-25 is used to enable or disable the ZR1 solenoids completly.

The 74LS175 chip can be controlled by writing value to WPC_EXTBOARD3 (via the DIS2 line on J204/3) at 0x3FED.
According to my electronics buddy he says that there's two pull-up resistors (R18/R19) which disable power to the
solenoids at power on.  To enable solenoid power you have to write a 0 in bit 0 (LSB - D0) of WPC_EXTBOARD3 which
disables the DISABLE_A and DISABLE_B lines.  To then disable the solenoid power by software you set bit 0 (LSB - 
D0) of WPC_EXTBOARD3 to 1, thus activating the DISABLE_A and DISABLE_B lines. 
UPDATE: after real machine testing the reverse was found, setting WPC_EXTBOARD3 to 1 enables the solenoids, setting
it to 0 disables the solenoids.  Solenoids ARE disabled on initial power up so the part about the pull-up resistors
partly holds true.

The Visual Pinball and VPinMame emulation of Corvette uses values in the range of 64 to 192.
64 meaning far left, 127 meaning center, 192 meaning right.

<code>
468 		locals.enginePos = (int)wpc_data[WPC_EXTBOARD2];
</code>

http://pinmame.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/pinmame/pinmame/src/wpc/sims/wpc/prelim/corv.c?revision=1.17&view=markup

My real Corvette pinball machine gives values during a few calibration test runs:

* 68 for left, 176 for right and 122 for center.
* 75 for left, 170 for right and 121 for center.
* 74 for left, 166 for right and 120 for center - 3 times

During the auto-run feature of the ZR1-LT5 engine test i noticed the when the engine shakes the left and right
optos are not normally activated.

=== Calibration ===

# Set the value to 127.
# Slowly decrease the value until the "ZR1 Full Left" opto is activated.
# Record the value and store as FULL LEFT OPTO ON.
# Slowly increase the value until the "ZR1 Full Left" opto is de-activated.
# Record the value and store as FULL LEFT OPTO OFF.
# Slowly increase the value until the "ZR1 Full Right" opto is activated.
# Record the value and store as FULL RIGHT OPTO ON.
# Slowly decrease the value until the "ZR1 Full Right" opto is de-activated.
# Record the value and store as FULL RIGHT OPTO OFF.
# Calculate ENGINE CENTER 
# Slowly decrease the value back to ENGINE CENTER.
# Calibration done.

Example values take from a real machine

 127 - 74 (FULL LEFT OPTO OFF) = 53
 166 (FULL RIGHT OPTO OFF) - 127 = 39
 53 - 39 = 14
 14 / 2 = 7
 127 - 7 = 120 = ENGINE CENTER

Another example of calculation using other values a real machine gave:

 127 - 68 (FULL LEFT OPTO OFF) = 59
 176 (FULL RIGHT OPTO OFF) - 127 = 49
 59 - 49 = 10
 10 / 2 = 5
 127 - 5 = 122

=== General Operation ===

The working range for the engine values should be: FULL LEFT OPTO OFF and FULL RIGHT OPTO OFF.

Byte values of less than 64 or more than 192 should not be used.

A suitable value (e.g. 127) should be set at WPC_EXTBOARD2 before enabling the solenoids.

When the engine is not in use the drive should be disabled by setting values at WPC_EXTBOARD3

The engine does need to be held in a centered position during a game, the engine cannot be left
to fail about otherwise balls get stuck under it and shots cannot be made.
